Going to Lucali is a pain in the ass. The 30-seat spot in Carroll Gardens doesn’t take reservations, and hours before opening, a line already stretches from the velvet rope guarding the door to some brownstone’s stoop around the corner. That’s just to put your name on the list. After that, you might have to wait one, two, or five hours before your phone rings and you’re told to arrive in the next ten minutes. So why should you put up with all of this?

Because Lucali makes the best pizza in New York City.

Lucali review image
The light, blistered crust on its own will make you feel the type of emotional connection your ex said you weren’t capable of. It’s thin and chewy, but holds its shape under layers of velvety tomato sauce and three types of cheese. And yet it’s the piles of fresh basil that put the pizza here over the top. The mounds of bright green leaves are so aromatic that the scent hits you even when there isn’t any on a slice. Lucali is pizza’s apex, a culinary equivalent of Federer in 2006, dinosaurs before the meteor, or interpersonal skills before social media. The only other thing on the menu is the calzone. And coming to Lucali and not ordering one to go along with your pie is like watching Parasite and not reading the subtitles.

Lucali review image
There’s plenty of other very good pizza in New York City that doesn’t require both leaving work early and going to sleep late. But only Lucali feels like a holdover from old-school south Brooklyn - even if it opened in 2006. Dough is rolled out with wine bottles, the owner’s white, drop-top Impala is usually parked out front, and old-looking boxing gloves hang under an even older-looking tin ceiling. Once you embrace the brusque servers and their one-bottle-per-table BYOB policy, you’ll appreciate Lucali’s complete lack of interest in indulging you in any way. It wouldn’t fly if you could find pizza this good anywhere else. The thing is - you can’t.

There are only two things on the menu - a pizza and a calzone - and you absolutely need to order both. Here are the components that make them special.